The Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle Problem on Guam: Past, Present and 
Future

Aubrey Moore

[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubrey/Desktop/CRB_Past_Present_Future/rhino_beetle_head.jpg>

[Figure 1: 
<fig:Coconut-rhinoceros-beetle>Coconut rhinoceros beetle (Image 
courtesy of US Forest Health - Durham Office)
]


]

[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubrey/Desktop/CRB_Past_Present_Future/dying_coconuts.1200x1200.jpeg>

[Figure 2: 
<fig:CRB-damage>Coconut palms at the University of Guam 
Agricultural Experiment Station in Yigo severely damaged by 
coconut rhinoceros beetle.
]


]

Table of Contents

1 CRB Biology and Invasion History
2 Guam CRB Eradication Program
2.1 Quarantine 
2.2 Sanitation 
2.3 Trapping 
2.4 Chemical control 
3 Guam CRB Biological Control Program
3.1 Oryctes rhinoceros Nudivirus (OrNV)
3.2 Metarhizium majus
4 Typhoon Dolphin Triggers a CRB Population Explosion
5 Where do we go from here?





Guam's ecosystems are under attack by invasive species. Many 
people know about extinction of Guam's birds by the brown 
treesnake which invaded the island shortly after WWII. But the 
contemporary ecological disaster which is currently happening in 
Guam's forests is not well known: the trees are dying. 

It is estimated that 90% of Guam's endemic cycads, locally known 
as fadang, have been killed by a coalition of recently-arrived 
invasive insects which includes a scale insect, a leaf-mining 
moth, and a defoliating butterfly. Fadang was listed as being the 
most abundant tree in Guam's forests in a 2002 forestry survey [7]
 This plant was added to the National Endangered Species List in 
2015 [2]. 

The same 2002 forestry survey listed coconut palm as the second 
most abundant tree on Guam. During recent years, many coconuts 
and other palms on Guam have been severely damaged and killed by 
the coconut rhinoceros beetle (CRB) (Figure [fig:Coconut-rhinoceros-beetle]
). There is no estimate for the proportion of palms killed but it 
is obvious to residents and visitors that the island's palms are 
being killed at an alarming rate. 

In this article I present a short history of the CRB problem on 
Guam and I recommend a strategy to stop the outbreak which is 
damaging and killing our palms. 

1 CRB Biology and Invasion History

CRB is a large scarab beetle native to southeast Asia. Like all 
beetles, CRB has four life stages: egg, grub, pupa, and adult 
(Figure [fig:CRB-life-cycle]). Only the adult stage causes 
damage. Grubs feed only on decaying vegetation and do no harm. 
Adult males and females bore into the crowns of coconut palms and 
other palms to feed on sap. They do not feed on leaves, but they 
bore holes through developing leaves on their way to the white 
tissue at the interior of the crown. When these damaged leaves 
eventually emerge from the crown, they have v-shaped cuts in 
them, a distinctive sign of CRB damage (Figure [fig:CRB-damage]). 
Each adult feeds on sap for only a few days. It then leaves the 
crown to search for a breeding site. Palms may be killed if a CRB 
bores through the growing tip (the meristem). Mature palms are 
rarely killed at low CRB population levels. However, trees are 
killed when they are simultaneously attacked by many adults 
during a population outbreak such as the one we are currently 
experiencing on Guam. 

[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubrey/Desktop/CRB_Past_Present_Future/crb_life_cycle2_cropped.png>

[Figure 3: 
<fig:CRB-life-cycle>Coconut rhinoceros beetle life cycle.
]
]

CRB breeding sites can be found in any mass of decaying 
vegetation. Preferred sites are standing dead coconut stems and 
fallen coconut logs and fronds. But piles of anything with a high 
concentration of decaying vegetation can be used as a breeding 
site including green-waste, dead trees of any species, saw dust, 
and manure. CRB breeding sites have even been found in 
commercially bagged soil purchased from a local hardware store [10]
. An active breeding site will contain all CRB life stages. 
Adults locate breeding sites by sniffing out a chemical signal 
referred to as an aggregation pheromone. This pheromone has been 
synthesized and is commercially available [5]. 

A female rhino beetle lays about 100 eggs during her lifetime. 
Assuming a 50% sex ratio and 100% survival, there will be a 
population increase of 5,000% during each generation. Thus 
population explosions may occur when abundant potential breeding 
sites are available in the form of rotting vegetation following 
destruction in the wake of a typhoon, large scale land clearing, 
or war. Large numbers of CRB adults generated by a population 
explosion may result in large numbers of palms being killed. The 
dead standing trunks soon become ideal breeding sites which 
generate even higher numbers of adults. This positive feedback 
cycle will end when the rhino beetles run out of food, meaning 
when most of the palms have been killed and rotted away.

CRB invaded islands in the Pacific and Indian oceans during two 
waves of movement. The first wave occurred started in 1909 when 
CRB was accidentally transported to from Sri Lanka to Samoa with 
shipment of rubber tree seedlings and it ended during the 1970s [3]
. All of the CRB range expansion during this period was south of 
the equator except for the invasion of the Ryuku Islands (Japan) 
starting in 1921 [11] and invasion of the Palau Islands in about 
1942 [3]. In Palau, there was a population explosion of rhino 
beetles because WWII activities created abundant breeding sites. 
This resulted in about 50% coconut palm mortality overall, and 
total loss of coconut palms on some of the smaller islands [4].

The second wave of CRB invasions started in 2007 with discovery 
of CRB on Guam, followed by invasion of Oahu (Hawaii), Port 
Morseby (Papua New Guinea), Guadalcanal, Savo and Malaita 
(Solomon Islands), and Rota (Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands). Beetles in the second wave of invasions are genetically 
different from those in the first wave [8] and these are being 
referred to as the “Guam biotype” or CRB-G for short.

[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubrey/Desktop/CRB_Past_Present_Future/crb_dist.png>

[Figure 4: 
<fig:Distribution>Distribution coconut rhinoceros beetle, Oryctes 
rhinoceros. Green markers: native range; Brown markers: first 
detected in the 20th century; Red markers: first detected in the 
21st century; Open circle: population includes CRB-G biotype; 
Filled circle: population is exclusively CRB-G biotype. An 
interactive version of this map is available online at http://aubreymoore.github.io/crbdist/mymap.html
.
]
]

2 Guam CRB Eradication Program

CRB was first detected on Guam was found in Lower Tumon on 
September 11, 2007 (Table [tab:Chronology]). An island-wide 
survey, completed within two weeks, located CRB grubs and adults 
and damage symptoms only in Lower Tumon and at the adjacent 
Faifai Beach, an area totaling less than 1,000 acres [12]. Based 
on this information it was decided that eradication would be 
attempted. Here, I am using the word eradication in the proper 
sense, meaning killing every single CRB on the island. 

In theory, a CRB population can be eradication from an island by 
locating and destroying all active breeding sites and ensuring 
that the arrival pathway is blocked to prevent re-infestation. In 
practice, CRB eradication is difficult. There have been several 
CRB eradication attempts, but only one of these was successful. 
CRB was eradicated from Niuatoputapu Island, also known as Keppel 
Island, a tiny outer island of Tonga, only 16 square kilometers 
in area. Eradication was accomplished by a sanitation program 
which lasted 9 years following first detection of CRB in 1921 [3]
.

The Guam CRB Eradication Project was a joint effort involving the 
United States Department of Agriculture, the Guam Department of 
Agriculture and the University of Guam. Financial support came 
from the United States Department of Agriculture, the United 
States Forest Service and the Legislature of Guam. The project 
used several tactics aimed at wiping out the CRB population: 
quarantine, sanitation, trapping, and chemical control. These are 
explained below.

The opportunity to eradicate CRB from Guam was lost when the 
infestation spread from the Tumon Bay area to breeding sites on 
other parts of the island prior to 2010. Most breeding sites are 
currently inaccessible for application of eradication tactics, 
being in the deep jungle and/or on military property which 
includes about one third of the island.

2.1 Quarantine 

The Guam Department of Agriculture drew a line around the CRB 
infestation area and required inspection and/or treatment of any 
dead vegetation being transport to other parts of the island. The 
quarantine had to be expanded several times. By 2010, all parts 
of Guam were infested by CRB.

2.2 Sanitation 

Sanitation is the most important tactic in any CRB eradication 
project. The target is to find and destroy all breeding sites 
before adults are generated, thus halting reproduction preventing 
all damage. The eradication program employed 4 detector dogs 
trained to sniff out rhino beetle grubs.

2.3 Trapping 

At the start of the eradication project, we were advised that the 
adult population could be annihilated using the commercially 
available aggregation pheromone as a lure. To the contrary, we 
soon learned that the traps were ineffective for population 
suppression when new damage appeared in mass trapping areas. 
However, an island-wide trapping network of about 2,000 traps was 
useful for monitoring the spread and growth of the CRB 
population. Island-wide trapping was discontinued when Typhoon 
Dolphin visited the island in May 2015. 

A lot of work was done to improve pheromone traps [9]. Our best 
pheromone trap design catches about 20 times as many beetles as 
the original standard trap we started with. However, even these 
traps catch only about 25% of the adult beetles active in mass 
trapping areas: not high enough for effective population 
suppression under current conditions. During our CRB trap 
improvement project, we discovered that local fishermen were 
using a small fish gill net called tekken to capture CRB adults 
emerging from compost piles. This has become a useful tool for 
managing CRB. Tekken captures about 65% of adults attempting to 
leave infested compost or green-waste piles. What may be more 
important is that these same piles become attractive to incoming 
adults which are also trapped. 

2.4 Chemical control 

Individual palms can be protected from CRB attacks by 
prophylactic insecticide application. But this is very expensive. 
A row of 33 severely damaged coconut palms at the University of 
Guam Agricultural Experiment Station in Yigo were nursed back to 
apparent perfect health by spraying their crowns with the 
insecticide cypermethrin on a biweekly schedule. It took 15 
months of treatment before all damaged fronds were replaced by 
healthy ones.

3 Guam CRB Biological Control Program

In their native environment insect populations are suppressed by 
natural enemies which include parasites, predators and pathogens. 
When alien insects invade islands they escape control by natural 
enemies, resulting in damaging population explosions. Biological 
control programs introduce biocontrol agents which specifically 
target invasive species. There are many examples of successful 
biological control programs on Guam where invasive species 
populations are maintained at low levels by purposefully 
introduced biocontrol agents. 

The Guam CRB Biological Control Program was launched following 
failure of the eradication attempt. There are two widely used 
biocontrol agents for CRB, a virus called Oryctes rhinoceros 
nudivirus (OrNV) and a fungus called Metarhizium majus. Both of 
these pathogens attack only rhino beetles and pose no risk to 
other organisms.

3.1 Oryctes rhinoceros Nudivirus (OrNV)

Shortly after its discovery in Malaysia in 1963 [6], OrNV 
(Oryctes rhinoceros nudivirus), was released as a biocontrol 
agent on Pacific islands which had been invaded by CRB. The 
release technique, referred to as auto-dissemination, is very 
simple: adult rhino beetles are infected with the virus and then 
released. The virus quickly spreads throughout the CRB population 
and persists in the environment indefinitely. Wherever the virus 
was released, there was a drastic decline of the beetle 
populations followed by a conspicuous recovery of the badly 
damaged coconut stands. After OrNV was released in Palau, CRB 
damage symptoms disappeared almost entirely. We expected the same 
results on Guam.

OrNV was sourced from AgResearch New Zealand, a NZ government 
research lab which maintains a collection of OrNV isolates. One 
isolate was imported and released on Guam under conditions of 
permits from USDA-APHIS and the Guam Department of Agriculture. 
Unexpectedly, we observed no response to treatment at field 
release sites. Subsequent laboratory tests showed that the Guam 
CRB population is resistant to the OrNV isolates available from 
AgResearch. This discovery lead to the realization that we are 
dealing with a genetically distinct CRB which is resistant to 
biological control by OrNV, which has been named CRB-G [8]. 
Although the “G” refers to Guam, genetic evidence shows that this 
biotype evolved thousands of years ago, prior to its arrival on 
Guam. 

As previously mentioned, all CRB invasions of Pacific islands in 
the 21st century involve CRB-G. The current resurgence of CRB 
damage in Palau is thought to be caused by a recent invasion of 
the islands by CRB-G rather than by a different biotype which has 
been there since WWII. 

3.2 Metarhizium majus

Metarhizium majus is a fungus which acts as a pathogen in 
rhinoceros beetles. Spores of M. majus are produced in a 
laboratory using corn or rice as a substrate and the resulting 
material is applied to breeding sites as a bio-insecticide. 

M. majus was imported from the Philippine Coconut Authority and 
released on Guam under conditions of permits from USDA-APHIS and 
the Guam Department of Agriculture. There were no observations of 
CRB grubs or adults infected with M. majus prior to release of 
the fungus. An extensive post-release survey showed that between 
10% and 38% of field collected CRB died from M. majus infection 
within 21 days after collection. M. majus has established on Guam 
and it is often found in untreated breeding sites. However, this 
biocontrol agent did not suppressed populations enough to prevent 
the current outbreak. 

4 Typhoon Dolphin Triggers a CRB Population Explosion

When we thought that the Guam CRB problem could not get worse, it 
did. Typhoon Dolphin triggered the current CRB outbreak we are 
now experiencing.

Typhoon Dolphin visited Guam in May 2015. It was not a very 
strong typhoon by Guam standards, but it was the first one in 
more than a decade and it created a lot more damage than 
expected. Abundant piles of decaying vegetation became CRB 
breeding sites. Some of these new breeding sites were in villages 
were they could be managed. But most were inaccessible: in 
jungles and/or on military land. Within a few months, massive 
numbers of adults were emerging from breeding sites and severely 
attacking palms which started to die. Prior to Dolphin, we saw 
some heavily damages palms, but very few dead ones. Once a palm 
is killed, its dead standing trunk becomes an excellent breeding 
site which eventually produces even more adults resulting in a 
self-sustaining outbreak such as the one we are experiencing.

5 Where do we go from here?

If we do not control the current rhino beetle outbreak on Guam, 
it will only end when the beetles run out of food. Which means 
most of Guam's palm trees will be killed, as happened in Palau 
after WWII. If current CRB-G outbreaks in the Pacific cannot be 
suppressed, it is only a matter of time until this biotype 
invades other islands through accidental transport. If CRB-G 
reaches atolls where the coconut palm is the tree of life this 
will be a human tragedy, possibly displacing islanders to larger 
population centers.

At the 2016 International Congress of Entomology, the USDA 
sponsored a meeting to plan a regional response to CRB-G [1]. 
Pacific-based entomologists with extensive experience working 
with CRB agreed that our best bet for stopping CRB-G outbreaks is 
to find an effective biocontrol agent for CRB-G. Most likely this 
will be an isolate of OrNV which is highly pathogenic for CRB-G. 
Although a regional project has yet to be funded and organized, 
the search has already begun. The University of Guam has been 
awarded a grant from USDA-APHIS to collaborate with rhino beetle 
biocontrol experts at AgResearch New Zealand and another grant 
from Department of the Interior's Office of Island Affairs will 
fund a post-doc entomologist to work on this project.

[float Table:
[Table 1: 
<tab:Chronology>Chronology of the coconut rhinoceros beetle (CRB) 
problem on Guam.
]


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Year            Event / Activity                                                                                                                  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Sept 2007       CRB discovered in Tumon.                                                                                                          
  2007            Governor Camacho issues Executive Order 2007-013: Declaration of 
Emergency                                                       
  2007-2010       Attempt to eradicate CRB using sanitation, pheromone traps, 
quarantine, and pesticides.                                          
  2011-present    Attempt to control CRB with biological control agents (Oryctes 
rhinoceros nudivirus and Metarhizium majus).                      
  2014            Started using tekken net to trap beetles leaving and entering 
breeding sites.                                                    
  May 2015        Typhoon Dolphin generates abundant CRB breeding sites throughout 
the island, triggering a self-sustaining island-wide outbreak.  
  May 2015        Island-wide pheromone trapping program for monitoring CRB 
population trends is discontinued.                                     
  July 2017       Governor Calvo issues Executive Order 2017-04: Declaration of 
Emergency                                                          
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



]




References

[1] "Scientists Confront the Threat of a New Type of Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle Invading Islands in the Pacific".

[2] "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Endangered Status for 16 Species and Threatened Status for 7 Sp…", Federal Register (2015).

[3] A Catley, "The coconut rhinoceros beetle Oryctes rhinoceros (L)", International Journal of Pest Management: Part A  15, 1 (1969), pp. 18--30.

[4] Linsley J Gressitt, "The coconut rhinoceros beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros) with particular reference to the Palau Islands" (1953), 1--83.

[5] Rebecca H Hallett, A L Perez, G Gries, R Gries, Jr H. D. Pierce, Junming Yue, A C Oehlschlager, L M Gonzales, and John H. Borden, "Aggregation pheromone of coconut rhinoceros beetle, Oryctes rhinoceros (L.) (COLEOPTERA: SCARABAEIDAE)",   (1995), pp. 1549--1570.

[6] Alois M. Huger, "The Oryctes virus: Its detection, identification, and implementation in biological control of the coconut palm rhinoceros b…", Journal of Invertebrate Pathology  89, 1 (2005), pp. 78--84.

[7]  J. A. Donnegon, "Guam's Forest Resources, 2002".

[8] Sean D. G. Marshall, Aubrey Moore, Maclean Vaqalo, Alasdair Noble, and Trevor A. Jackson, "A new haplotype of the coconut rhinoceros beetle, Oryctes rhinoceros, has escaped biological control by Oryctes rhinoceros …", Journal of Invertebrate Pathology  149 (2017), pp. 127--134.

[9] Aubrey Moore and Roland Quitugua, "Pacific Entomology Conference 2015 Oral Presentation: Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle Trap Improvements",   (2015).

[10] Aubrey Moore, Roland Quitugua, Ian Iriarte, Michael Melzer, Shizu Watanabe, Zhiqiang Cheng, and Jathan Muna Barnes, "Movement of Packaged Soil Products as a Dispersal Pathway for Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle, Oryctes rhinoceros (…", Proceedings of the Hawaiian Entomological Society  48 (2016), pp. 21--22.

[11] Yasuhiro Oshiro and Sumiko Okushima, "Biological studies on the coconut rhinoceros beetle: 1. Local distribution and immigrant route in the Ryukyu Islands, So…", Okinawa Agriculture  16, 1 (1980), pp. 15--22.

[12] Sheri Lee Smith and Aubrey Moore, "Early Detection Pest Risk Assessment: Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle",   (2008). Evidence 41.



